Hey! Hey!
Now is the winter of ourdiscontent
made glorious summer bythis son of York.
And all the clouds thatlowered upon our house
in the deep bosom of theocean buried.
Now are our brows boundwith victorious wreaths,
our bruised arms hung upfor monuments,
our stern alarums changedto merry meetings,
our dreadful marches todelightful measures.
Grim-visaged war hathsmoothed his wrinkledfront,
and now, instead ofmounting barbed steeds
to fright the souls offearful adversaries,
he capers nimbly in alady's chamber
to the lascivious pleasingof a lute.
But I, that am not shapedfor sportive tricks
nor made to court anamorous looking glass;
I, that am rudely stamped
and want love's majesty tostrut before a wantonambling nymph;
I, that am curtailed ofthis fair proportion,
cheated of feature bydissembling nature,
deformed, unfinished,
sent before my time intothis breathing world
scarce half made up,
and that so lamely andunfashionable
that dogs bark at me as Ihalt by them--
why I, in this weak pipingtime of peace
have no delight to passaway the time,
unless to spy my shadow inthe sun
and descant on my owndeformity.
And therefore, since Icannot prove a lover
to entertain these fairwell-spoken days,
I am determined to prove avillain
and hate the idlepleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid,inductions dangerous,
by drunken prophecies,libels, and dreams,
to set my brother Clarenceand the king in deadly hate
the one against the other.
And if King Edward be astrue and just
as I am subtle, false, andtreacherous,
this day should Clarenceclosely be mewed up
about a prophecy whichsays
that G of Edward's heirsthe murderer shall be.
Dive, thoughts, down to mysoul.
Here Clarence comes.
Brother, good day.
What means this armed guardthat waits upon your grace?
His majesty, tendering myperson's safety,
hath appointed thisconduct to convey me tothe Tower.
Upon what cause?
Because my name is George.
Alack, my lord, that faultis none of yours.
He should for that commityour godfathers.
Oh, belike his majestyhath some intent
that you shall benew-christened in the Tower.
What's the matter,Clarence?
May I know?
Yea, Richard, when I know,
for I protest, as yet I donot.
But as I can learn, hehearkens after propheciesand dreams
and from the cross-rowplucks the letter G
and says a wizard told him
that by G his issuedisinherited should be.
And, for my name of Georgebegins with G,
it follows in his thoughtthat I am he.
These, as I learn, andsuch like toys as these
have moved his highness tocommit me now.
Why, this it is, when menare ruled by women.
'Tis not the king thatsends you to the Tower.
My Lady Grey, his wife,Clarence;
'tis she that tempers himto this extremity.
Was it not she and thatgood man of worship,
Anthony Woodville, herbrother there,
that made him send LordHastings to the Tower,
from whence this presentday he is delivered?
We are not safe, Clarence.
We are not safe.
By heaven, I think thereis no man secure
but the queen's kindredand night-walking heralds
that trudge betwixt theking and Mistress Shore.
Heard ye not what anhumble suppliant
Lord Hastings was to herfor his delivery?
Humbly complaining to herdeity
got my lord chamberlainhis liberty.
I'll tell you what.
I think it is our way,
if we will keep in favorwith the king,
to be her men and wear herlivery.
The jealous o'erworn widowand herself,
since that our brotherdubbed them gentlewomen,
are mighty gossips in ourmonarchy.
I beseech your graces bothto pardon me.
His majesty hath straitlygiven in charge
that no man shall haveprivate conference
of what degree soever withhis brother.
Even so, and it pleaseyour worship, Brakenbury,
you may partake ofanything we say.
We speak no treason, man.
We say the king is wiseand virtuous
and his noble queen wellstruck in years, fair, andnot jealous.
We say that Shore's wifehath a pretty foot, acherry lip,
a bonny eye, a passingpleasing tongue,
and that the queen's kindredare made gentle-folk.
Now how say you, sir?
Can you deny all this?
With this, my lord, myselfhave naught to do.
Naught with MistressShore?
I tell thee, fellow,
he that doth naught withher, excepting one,
were best to do itsecretly, alone.
What one, my lord?
Her husband, knave.Wouldst thou betray me?
I do beseech your grace topardon me
and withal forbear yourconference with the noble duke.
We know thy charge,Brakenbury, and will obey.
We are the queen's objectsand must obey.
Brother, farewell.
I will unto the king.
And whatsoe'er you willemploy me in,
were it to call KingEdward's widow sister,
I will perform it toenfranchise you.
Meantime, this deepdisgrace in brotherhood
touches me deeper than youcan imagine.
I know it pleaseth neitherof us well.
Well, your imprisonmentshall not be long.
I will deliver you or elselie for you.
Meantime, have patience.
I must, perforce.
Farewell.
Go; tread the path thatthou shalt ne'er return.
Simple, plain Clarence.
I do love thee so
that I will shortly sendthy soul to heaven,
if heaven will take thepresent at our hands.
But who comes here?
The new-deliveredHastings.
Good time of day unto mygracious lord.
As much unto my good lordchamberlain.
Well are you welcome tothe open air.
How hath your lordshipbrooked imprisonment?
With patience, noble lord,as prisoners must.
But I shall live, my lord,to give them thanks
that were the cause of myimprisonment.
No doubt, no doubt, and soshall Clarence too,
for they that were yourenemies are his
and have prevailed as muchon him as you.
More pity that the eagleshould be mewed
while kites and buzzardsprey at liberty.
What news abroad?
No news so bad abroad asthis at home.
The king is sickly, weak,melancholy,
and his physicians fearhim mightily.
Now, by Saint John, thatnews is bad indeed.
O, he hath kept an evildiet long
and overmuch consumed hisroyal person.
'Tis very grievous to bethought upon.
Where is he, in his bed?
He is.
Go you before, and I willfollow you.
He cannot live, I hope,and must not die
till George be packed withpost-horse up to heaven.
I'll in, to urge hishatred more to Clarence
with lies well steeledwith weighty arguments.
And if I fail not in mydeep intent,
Clarence hath not anotherday to live;
which done, God take KingEdward to his mercy
and leave the world for meto bustle in,
for then I'll marryWarwick's youngest daughter.
What though I killed herhusband and her father?
The readiest way to makethe wench amends
is to become her husbandand her father,
the which will I,
not all so much for loveas for another secretclose intent,
by marrying her which Imust reach unto.
But yet I run before myhorse to market.
Clarence still breathes.
Edward still lives andreigns.
When they are gone, thenmust I count my gain.
Set down, set down yourhonorable load,
if honor may be shroudedin a hearse,
whilst I awhileobsequiously lament
the untimely fall ofvirtuous Lancaster.
Poor key-cold figure of aholy king,
pale ashes of the house ofLancaster,
thou bloodless remnant ofthat royal blood.
Be it lawful that Iinvocate thy ghost
to hear the lamentationsof poor Anne,
wife to thy Edward, to thyslaughtered son,
stabbed by the selfsame handthat made these wounds.
Lo, in these windows thatlet forth thy life,
I pour the helpless balmof my poor eyes.
O, cursed be the hand thatmade these holes,
cursed the heart that hadthe heart to do it,
cursed the blood that letthis blood from hence.
More direful hap betidethat hated wretch
that makes us wretched bythe death of thee
than I can wish to adders,spiders, toads,
or any creeping venomedthing that lives.
If ever he have child,abortive be it,
prodigious, and untimelybrought to light,
whose ugly and unnaturalaspect
may fright the hopefulmother at the view,
and that be heir to hisunhappiness.
If ever he have wife,
let her be made moremiserable by the death of him
than I am made by my younglord and thee.
Come now towards Chertseywith your holy load,
taken from Paul's to beinterred there.
Stay, you that bear thecorse, and set it down.
What black magicianconjures up this fiend
to stop devoted charitabledeeds?
Villains, set down thecorse, or, by Saint Paul,
I'll make a corse of himthat disobeys.
My lord, stand back, andlet the coffin pass.
Unmannered dog, standthou, when I command.
Advance thy halberd higherthan my breast,
or, by Saint Paul, I'llstrike thee to my foot
and spurn upon thee,beggar, for thy boldness!
What? Do you tremble?
Are you all afraid?
Alas, I blame you not, foryou are mortal,
and mortal eyes cannotendure the devil.
Avaunt, thou dreadfulminister of hell.
Thou hadst but power overhis mortal body.
His soul thou canst nothave; therefore ,be gone.
Sweet saint, for charity,be not so curst.
Foul devil, for God's sake,hence, and trouble us not,
for thou hast made thehappy earth thy hell,
filled it with cursingcries and deep exclaims.
If thou delight to viewthy heinous deeds,
behold this pattern of thybutcheries!
O, gentlemen, see, see!
Dead Henry's wounds opentheir congealed mouths
and bleed afresh!
Blush, blush, thou lump offoul deformity,
for 'tis thy presence thatexhales this blood
from cold and empty veinswhere no blood dwells.
Thy deed, inhuman andunnatural,
provokes this deluge mostunnatural.
O God, which this bloodmadest,
revenge his death!
O earth, which this blooddrinkest,
Either heaven with lightningstrike the murderer dead,
or earth, gape open wideand eat him quick,
as thou dost swallow upthis good king's blood,
which his hell-governedarm hath butchered!
Lady, you know no rules ofcharity,
which renders good forbad, blessings for curses.
Villain, thou knowest nolaw of God nor man.
No beast so fierce butknows some touch of pity.
But I know none andtherefore am no beast.
O wonderful, when devilsspeak the truth!
More wonderful when angelsare so angry.
Vouchsafe, divineperfection of a woman,
of these supposed crimesto give me leave
by circumstance but toacquit myself.
Vouchsafe, defusedinfection of a man,
of these known evils butto give me leave
by circumstance to accusethy cursed self!
Fairer than tongue canname thee.
Let me have some patientleisure to excuse myself.
Fouler than heart canthink thee.
Thou canst make no excusecurrent but to hang thyself!
By such despair, I shouldaccuse myself.
And by despairing shaltthou stand excused
for doing worthy vengeanceon thyself,
that didst unworthyslaughter upon others.
Say that I slew them not.
Then say they were notslain, but dead they are,
and, devilish slave, bythee.
I did not kill yourhusband.
Why, then he is alive.
Nay, he is dead, and slainby Edward's hand.
In thy foul throat, thouliest.
Queen Margaret saw thymurderous falchion smokingin his blood,
the which thou once didstspend against her breast,
but that thy brothers beataside the point.
I was provoked by herslanderous tongue
that laid their guilt uponmy guiltless shoulders.
Thou wast provoked by thybloody mind,
that never dreamt on aughtbut butcheries.
Didst thou not kill thisking?
I grant ye, aye.
Dost grant me, hedgehog?
Then God grant me too
thou mayest be damned forthat wicked deed!
O, he was gentle, mild,and virtuous!
The better for the King ofHeaven, that hath him.
He is in heaven, wherethou shalt never come.
Let him thank me that holpto send him thither,
for he was fitter for thatplace than earth.
And thou unfit for anyplace but hell.
Yes, one place else, ifyou will hear me name it.
Some dungeon.
Your bedchamber.
Ill rest betide thechamber where thou liest!
So will it, madam, till Ilie with you.
I hope so.
I know so.
But, gentle Lady Anne,
to leave this keenencounter of our wits
and fall something into aslower method,
is not the causer of thetimeless deaths
of these Plantagenets,Henry and Edward,
as blameful as theexecutioner?
Thou wast the cause andmost accursed effect.
Your beauty was the causeof that effect,
your beauty that did hauntme in my sleep
to undertake the death ofall the world
so I might live one hourin your sweet bosom.
If I thought that, I tellthee, homicide,
these nails should rendthat beauty from mycheeks.
These eyes could not endurethat beauty's wreck.
You should not blemish itif I stood by.
As all the world is cheered bythe sun, so I by that.
It is my day, my life.
Black night o'ershade thyday and death thy life!
Curse not thyself, faircreature; thou art both.
I would I were to berevenged on thee.
It is a quarrel mostunnatural
to be revenged on him thatloveth thee.
It is a quarrel just andreasonable
to be revenged on him thatkilled my husband.
He that bereft thee, lady,of thy husband
did it to help thee to abetter husband.
His better doth notbreathe upon the earth.
He lives that loves theebetter than he could.
Name him.
Plantagenet.
Why, that was he.
The selfsame name but oneof better nature.
Where is he?
Here.
Why dost thou spit at me?
Would it were mortalpoison, for thy sake.
Never came poison from sosweet a place.
Never hung poison on afouler toad.
Out of my sight! Thou dostinfect mine eyes.
Thine eyes, sweet lady,have infected mine.
Would they were basilisks,to strike thee dead!
I would they were, that Imight die at once,
for now they kill me witha living death.
Those eyes of thine frommine have drawn salt tears,
shamed their aspects withstore of childish drops.
These eyes, which nevershed remorseful tear,
no, when my father Yorkand Edward wept
to hear the piteous moanthat Rutland made
when black-faced Cliffordshook his sword at him
nor when thy warlikefather, like a child,
told the sad story of myfather's death
and twenty times madepause to sob and weep,
that all the standers-byhad wet their cheeks
like trees bedashed withrain.
In that sad time, my manlyeyes did scorn an humble tear,
and what these sorrowscould not thence exhale,
thy beauty hath,
and made them blind withweeping.
I never sued to friend norenemy.
My tongue could never learnsweet smoothing word.
But now thy beauty isproposed my fee,
my proud heart sues andprompts my tongue to speak.
Teach not thy lip suchscorn,
for it was made forkissing, lady,
not for such contempt.
If thy revengeful heartcannot forgive,
lo, here I lend thee thissharp-pointed sword,
which if thou please tohide in this true breast
and lay the soul forththat adoreth thee,
I lay it naked to thedeadly stroke
and humbly beg the deathupon my knee.
Nay, do not pause, for Idid kill King Henry,
but 'twas thy beauty thatprovoked me.
Nay, now dispatch!
'Twas I that stabbed youngEdward,
but 'twas thy heavenlyface that set me on.
Take up the sword again,or take up me.
Arise, dissembler.
Though I wish thy death, Iwill not be thy executioner.
Then bid me kill myself,and I will do it.
I have already.
That was in thy rage.
Speak it again, and evenwith the word,
this hand, which for thylove did kill thy love,
shall for thy love kill afar truer love.
To both their deaths thoushalt be accessory.
I would I knew thy heart.
'Tis figured in my tongue.
I fear me both are false.
Then never was man true.
Well, well, put up yoursword.
Say, then, my peace ismade.
That thou shalt knowhereafter.
But shall I live in hope?
All men, I hope, live so.
Vouchsafe to wear thisring.
To take is not to give.
Look how my ringencompasseth thy finger.
Even so, thy breastencloseth my poor heart.
Wear both of them, forboth of them are thine.
And if thy poor, devotedservant
may but beg one favor atthy gracious hand,
thou dost confirm hishappiness forever.
What is it?
That it may please youleave these sad designs
to him that hath mostcause to be a mourner
and presently repair toCrosby Place,
where, after I havesolemnly interred
at Chertsey Monastery thisnoble king
and wet his grave with myrepentant tears,
I will with all expedientduty see you
for divers unknownreasons.
I beseech you, grant methis boon.
With all my heart, andmuch it joys me too,
to see you are become sopenitent.
Tressel and Berkeley, goalong with me.
Bid me farewell.
'Tis more than youdeserve.
But since you teach me howto flatter you,
imagine I have saidfarewell already.
Sirs, take up the corse.
Towards Chertsey, noblelord?
No, to Whitefriars; thereattend my coming.
Was ever woman in thishumor wooed?
Was ever woman in thishumor won?
I'll have her, but I willnot keep her long.
What?
I, that killed her husbandand his father,
to take her in her heart'sextremest hate,
curses in her mouth, tearsin her eyes,
the bleeding witness ofher hatred by;
having God, herconscience, and these barsagainst me,
and I, no friends to backmy suit at all
but the plain devil anddissembling looks,
and yet to win her, allthe world to nothing.
Hath she forgot already thatbrave prince, Edward, her lord,
whom I, some three monthssince,
stabbed in my angry moodat Tewksbury?
A sweeter and a loveliergentleman,
framed in the prodigalityof nature,
young, valiant, wise, and,no doubt, right royal,
the spacious world cannotagain afford.
And will she yet debaseher eyes on me,
that cropped the goldenprime of this sweet prince
and made her widow to awoeful bed?
On me, whose all notequals Edward's moiety?
On me, who halts and ammisshapen thus?
My dukedom to a beggarlydenier,
I do mistake my person allthis while.
Upon my life, she finds,although I cannot,
myself to be a marvelousproper man.
I'll be at charges for alooking glass
and entertain a score ortwo of tailors
to study fashion to adornmy body.
Since I am crept in favorwith myself,
I will maintain it at somelittle cost.
But first, I'll turn yonfellow in his grave
and then return, lamentingto my love.
Shine out, fair sun, tillI have bought a glass,
that I might see my shadowas I pass.
Have patience, sister.
There's no doubt
his majesty will soon recoverhis accustom'd health.
In that you brook it ill,it makes him worse.
Therefore, for God's sake,entertain good comfort,
and cheer his grace withquick and merry eyes.
If he were dead, whatwould betide of me?
No other harm but loss ofsuch a lord.
The loss of such a lordincludes all harms!
The heavens have blessedyou with a goodly son
to be your comforter whenhe is gone.
Ah, he is young, and hisminority is put
unto the trust of RichardGloucester,
a man who loves not me nornone of you.
Is it concluded he shallbe protector?
It is determined, notconcluded yet,
but so it must be, if theking miscarry.
Here come the lords ofBuckingham and Derby.
Good time of day unto yourroyal grace.
God make your majestyjoyful as you have been.
The Countess Richmond,good my lord of Derby,
to your good prayer wouldscarcely say amen.
Yet, Derby, notwithstandingshe's your wife
and loves not me, be you,good lord, assured
I hate not you for herproud arrogance.
I do beseech you, eithernot believe
the envious slanders ofher false accusers,
or, if she be accused ontrue report,
bear with her weakness,
which, I think, proceedsfrom wayward sickness
and no grounded malice.
Saw you the king today, mylord of Derby?
But now the duke ofBuckingham and I
are come from visiting hismajesty.
What likelihood of hisamendment, lords?
Madam, good hope.
His grace speakscheerfully.
God grant him health.
Did you confer with him?
Aye, madam.
He desires to makeatonement
between the duke ofGloucester and your brothers
and between them and mylord chamberlain
and sent to warn them tohis royal presence.
Would all were well.
But that will never be.
I fear our happiness is atthe height.
They do me wrong, and Iwill not endure it.
Who is it that complainsunto the king
that I, forsooth, am sternand love them not?
By holy Paul, they lovehis grace but lightly
that fill his ears withsuch dissentious rumors.
Because I cannot flatterand look fair,
smile in men's faces,smooth, deceive, and cog,
duck with French nods andapish courtesy,
I must be held a rancorousenemy.
Cannot a plain man liveand think no harm,
but thus his simple truthmust be abused
with silken, sly,insinuating jacks?
To who in all this presencespeaks your grace?
To thee, that hast norhonesty nor grace.
When have I injured thee?
When done thee wrong?
Or thee? Or thee?
Or any of your faction?
A plague upon you all!
His royal grace,
whom God preserve betterthan you would wish,
cannot be quiet scarce abreathing-while
but you must trouble himwith lewd complaints.
Brother of Gloucester, youmistake the matter.
The king, on his own royaldisposition
and not provoked by anysuitor else,
aiming, belike, at yourinterior hatred
that in your outwardactions shows itself
against my children,brothers, and myself,
makes him to send,
that he may learn theground of your ill will
and thereby to remove it.
I cannot tell.
The world is grown so bad
that wrens make prey whereeagles dare not perch.
Since every jack became agentleman,
there's many agentleperson made a jack.
Come, come, we know yourmeaning, brother Gloucester.
You envy my advancementand my friends'.
God grant we never mayhave need of you!
Meantime, God grants thatwe have need of you.
Our brother is imprison'dby your means,
myself disgraced,
and the nobility held incontempt,
while great promotions aredaily given
to ennoble those thatscarce some two days since
were worth a noble.
By Him that raised me tothis careful height
from that contented hapwhich I enjoyed,
I never did incense hismajesty against the dukeof Clarence
but have been an earnestadvocate to plead for him.
My lord, you do meshameful injury
falsely to draw me inthese vile suspects.
You may deny that you werenot the mean
of my Lord Hastings' lateimprisonment.
She may, my lord, for--
She may, Lord Rivers.
Why, who knows not so?
She may do more, sir, thandenying that.
She may help you to manyfair preferments
and then deny her aidinghand therein
and lay those honors onyour high desert.
What may she not?
She may. Aye, marry, mayshe.
What, marry, may she?
Marry with a king, abachelor, and a handsomestripling too.
I wish your grandam had aworser match.
My lord of Gloucester, Ihave too long borne
your blunt upbraidings andyour bitter scoffs.
By Heaven, I will acquainthis majesty
of those gross taunts thatoft I have endured!
I had rather be a countryservant maid
than a great queen withthis condition
to be so baited, scorned,and stormed at.
Small joy have I in beingEngland's queen!
And lessened be thatsmall, God, I beseech Him.
Thy honor, state, and seatare due to me.
What!
Threat you me with tellingof the king?
Tell him, and spare not.
Look, what I have said,
I will avouch in presenceof the king.
I dare adventure to besent to the Tower.
'Tis time to speak; mypains are quite forgot.
Out, devil!
I remember them too well.
Thou kills't my husbandHenry in the Tower
and Edward, my poor son,at Tewksbury.
Ere you were queen, aye,or your husband king,
I was a packhorse in hisgreat affairs,
a weeder-out of his proudadversaries,
a liberal rewarder of hisfriends.
To royalize his blood, Ispent mine own.
Aye, and much better bloodthan his or thine.
Let me put in your minds,if you forget,
what you have been erethis and what you are;
withal, what I have beenand what I am.
A murderous villain, andso still thou art.
Poor Clarence did forsakehis father, Warwick.
Aye, and forswore himself,which, Jesu pardon--
Which God revenge.
To fight on Edward's partyfor the crown.
And for his meed, poorlord, he is mew'd up.
I would to God my heartwere flint like Edward's
or Edward's soft andpitiful like mine.
I am too childish-foolishfor this world.
My lord of Gloucester, inthose busy days
which here you urge toprove us enemies,
we followed then our lord,our sovereign king.
So should we you, if youshould be our king.
If I should be?
I'd rather be a peddler.
Far be it from my heart,the thought thereof.
As little joy, my lord, asyou suppose you should enjoy
were you this country'sking,
as little joy you maysuppose in me
that I enjoy being thequeen thereof.
Aye, little joy enjoys thequeen thereof,
for I am she andaltogether joyless.
I can no longer hold mepatient.
Hear me, you wranglingpirates, that fall out
in sharing that that youhave pilled from me.
Which of you trembles notthat looks on me
if not that I am queen,you bow like subjects,
yet that by you deposed,you quake like rebels?
Ah, gentle villain, do notturn away.
Foul wrinkled witch, whatmak'st thou in my sight?
But repetition of whatthou hast marred.
That will I make before Ilet thee go.
Wert thou not banished onpain of death?
I was, but I do find morepain in banishment
than death can yield mehere by my abode.
A husband and a son thouowest me.
And thou a kingdom.
All of you, allegiance.
This sorrow that I have byright is yours,
and all the pleasures youusurp are mine.
The curse my noble fatherlaid on thee
when thou didst crown hiswarlike brows with paper,
and with thy scorns drew'strivers from his eyes,
and then to dry themgavest the duke a clout
steeped in the faultlessblood of pretty Rutland--
His curses then frombitterness of souldenounced against thee
are all fallen upon thee.
And God, not we, haveplagued thy bloody deed.
So just is God to rightthe innocent.
O, 'twas the foulest deedto slay that babe
and the most mercilessthat e'er was heard of!
Tyrants themselves weptwhen it was reported.
No man but prophesiedrevenge for it.
Northumberland, thenpresent, wept to see it.
What?
Were you snarling allbefore I came,
ready to catch each otherby the throat
and turn you all yourhatred now on me?
Did York's dread curseprevail so much with Heaven
that Henry's death, mylovely Edward's death,
their kingdom's loss, mywoeful banishment
should all but answer forthat peevish brat?
Can curses pierce theclouds and enter Heaven?
Why, then, give way, dullclouds, to my quick curses!
Though not by war, bysurfeit die your king,
as ours by murder to makehim a king.
Edward, thy son, that nowis Prince of Wales,
for Edward, my son, thatwas Prince of Wales,
die in his youth by likeuntimely violence.
Thyself a queen, for methat was a queen,
outlive thy glory, like mywretched self.
Long mayest thou live towail thy children's death,
and see another, as I seethee now,
decked in thy rights asthou art stalled in mine.
Long die thy happy daysbefore thy death,
and after many lengthenedhours of grief,
die neither mother, wife,nor England's queen.
Rivers and Dorset, youwere standers by.
And so wast thou, LordHastings,
when my son was stabbedwith bloody daggers.
God, I pray him
that none of you may livehis natural age
but by some unlookedaccident cut off!
Have done thy charm, thouhateful, withered hag!
And leave out thee?
Stay, dog! For thou shalthear me.
If heaven have anygrievous plague in store
exceeding those that I canwish upon thee,
O, let them keep it tillthy sins be ripe,
and then hurl down theirindignation on thee,
the troubler of the poorworld's peace.
The worm of consciencestill begnaw thy soul.
Thy friends suspect fortraitors whilst thou lives
and take deep traitors forthy dearest friends.
No sleep close up thatdeadly eye of thine,
unless it be whilst sometormenting dream affrightsthee
with a hell of uglydevils.
O, thou elfish-marked,abortive, rooting hog!
Thou that wast sealed inthy nativity
the slave of nature andthe son of hell!
Ah, slander of thy heavymother's womb!
Thou loathed issue of thyfather's loins!
Thou rag of honor! Thoudetested--
Margaret!
Richard!
Huh?
I call thee not.
I cry thee mercy, then,for I did think
that thou hadst called meall these bitter names.
Why, so I did, but lookedfor no reply.
O, let me make the periodto my curse!
'Tis done by me and endsin Margaret.
Thus have you breathed yourcurse against yourself.
Poor painted queen, vainflourish of my fortune.
Why strew'st thou sugar onthat bottled spider,
whose deadly web ensnareththee about?
Fool, fool!
Thou whet'st a knife tokill thyself.
The day will come thatthou shalt wish for me
to help thee curse thispoisonous bunchbacked toad.
False-boding woman, endthy frantic curse,
lest to thy harm thou moveour patience.
Foul shame upon you!
You have all moved mine!
Were you well served, youwould be taught your duty.
To serve me well, you allshould do me duty.
Teach me to be your queenand you my subjects.
O, to serve me well, teachyourselves that duty.
Peace, please, for shameif not for charity.
Urge neither charity norshame to me!
Uncharitably with me haveyou dealt,
and shamefully my hopes byyou are butchered.
My charity is outrage;life, my shame.
And in that shame stilllive my sorrow's rage!
Have done, have done.
O princely Buckingham.
I kiss thy hand in sign ofleague and amity with thee.
Now fair befall thee andthy noble house.
Thy garments are notspotted with our blood,
nor thou within thecompass of my curse.
Nor no one here,
for curses never pass
the lips of those thatbreathe them in the air.
I will but think that theyascend the sky
and there awake God'sgentle-sleeping peace.
O Buckingham, take heed ofyonder dog!
Look, when he fawns, hebites.
And when he bites, hisvenom tooth will rankle tothe death.
Have naught to do withhim. Beware of him.
Sin, death, and hell haveset their marks on him,
and all their ministers,they attend on him.
What doth she say, my lordof Buckingham?
Nothing that I respect, mygracious lord.
What?
Dost thou scorn me for mygentle counsel
and soothe the devil thatI warn thee from?
O, remember this anotherday,
when he shall split thyvery heart with sorrow,
and say poor Margaret wasa prophetess.
Live, each of you,
the subjects to his hate
and he to yours
and all of you to God's.
My hair doth stand on endto hear her curses.
And so doth mine.
I muse why she's atliberty.
I cannot blame her.
By God's holy mother, shehath had too much wrong,
and I repent my part thereofthat I have done to her.
I never did her any, to myknowledge.
Yet you have all thevantage of her wrong.
I was too hot to dosomebody good
that is too cold inthinking of it now.
Marry, as for Clarence, heis well repaid.
He is franked up tofatting for his pains.
God pardon them that arethe cause thereof.
A virtuous and aChristian-like conclusion,
to pray for them that havedone scathe to us.
So do I ever, beingwell-advised,
for had I cursed now, I'dcurse myself.
Madam, his majesty dothcall for you
and for your grace andyou, my gracious lords.
Catesby, I come.
Lords, will you go withme?
We wait upon your grace.
I do the wrong and firstbegin to brawl.
The secret mischiefs thatI set abroach,
I lay unto the grievouscharge of others.
Clarence, whom I, indeed,have cast in darkness,
I do beweep to many simplegulls--
namely, to Derby,Hastings, Buckingham--
and tell them 'tis thequeen and her allies
that stir the king againstthe duke my brother.
Now they believe it andwithal whet me
to be revenged on Rivers,Dorset, Grey.
But then I sigh and with apiece of scripture,
tell them that God bids usdo good for evil,
and thus I clothe my nakedvillainy
with odd old ends stolenforth of holy writ
and seem a saint when mostI play the Devil.
But soft. Here come myexecutioners.
How now, my hardy, stout,resolved mates.
Are you now going todispatch this thing?
We are, my lord, and cometo have the warrant
that we may be admittedwhere he is.
Well thought upon; I haveit here about me.
When you have done, repairto Crosby Place.
But, sirs, be sudden in theexecution, withal obdurate.
Do not hear him plead,
for Clarence iswell-spoken
and perhaps may move yourhearts to pity
if you mark him.
Tut, tut, my lord.
We will not stand toprate.
Talkers are no good doers.
Be assured we go to use ourhands, not our tongues.
Your eyes drop millstoneswhen fools' eyes fall tears.
I like you, lads.
About your business,straight.
Go, go; dispatch.
We will, my noble lord.
Why looks your grace soheavily today?
O, I have passed amiserable night...
so full of fearful dreamsand ugly sights
that, as I am a Christianfaithful man,
I would not spend anothersuch a night
though 'twere to buy aworld of happy days,
so full of dismal terrorwas the time.
What was your dream, mylord?
I pray you, tell it.
Methought that I hadbroken from the Tower
and was embark'd to crossto Burgundy.
And in my company, mybrother Gloucester,
who from my cabin tempted meto walk upon the hatches.
Thence we looked towardEngland
and cited up a thousandheavy times
during the wars of Yorkand Lancaster
that had befallen us.
As we paced along upon thegiddy footing of the hatches,
methought that Gloucesterstumbled
and in falling, struck me,that thought to stay him,
overboard into the tumblingbillows of the main.
"O Lord," methought, "whatpain it was to drown."
What dreadful noise ofwaters in my ears.
What sights of ugly deathwithin my eyes.
Methought I saw a thousandfearful wrecks,
ten thousand men thatfishes gnawed upon,
wedges of gold, greatanchors, heaps of pearl,
inestimable stones,unvalued jewels,
all scattered in thebottom of the sea.
Some lay in dead men'sskulls.
And in the holes whereeyes did once inhabit,
there were crept, as'twere, in scorn of eyes,
reflecting gems that wooedthe slimy bottom of the deep
and mocked the dead bonesthat lay scattered by.
Had you such leisure inthe time of death
to gaze upon these secretsof the deep?
Methought I had,
and often did I strive toyield the ghost,
but still the enviousflood stopped in my soul
and would not let it forth
to find the empty, vast,and wandering air
but smothered it within mypanting bulk,
which almost burst tobelch it in the sea.
Awaked you not in thissore agony?
No, no, my dream waslengthened after life.
O, then began the tempestto my soul.
I passed, methought, themelancholy flood
with that sour ferrymanwhich poets write of
unto the kingdom ofperpetual night.
The first that there didgreet my stranger soul
was my great father-in-law,renowned Warwick,
who spake aloud, "Whatscourge for perjury
can this dark monarchyafford false Clarence?"
And so he vanished.
Then came wandering by ashadow like an angel
with bright hair dabbledin blood,
and he shrieked out aloud,
"Clarence is come,
"false, fleeting, perjuredClarence,
"that stabbed me in thefield by Tewksbury.
Seize on him, Furies. Takehim unto torment!"
With that, methought,
a legion of foul fiendsenvironed me
and howled in mine earssuch hideous cries
that with the very noise,I trembling waked,
and for a season aftercould not believe but thatI was in hell,
such terrible impressionmade my dream.
No marvel, lord, though itaffrighted you.
I am afraid, methinks, tohear you tell it.
Keeper, keeper, I havedone these things
that now give evidenceagainst my soul, forEdward's sake.
And see how he requitesme!
O God!
If my deep prayers cannotappease thee,
but thou wilt be avengedon my misdeeds,
yet execute thy wrath inme alone.
O, spare my guiltless wifeand my poor children.
Keeper, I prithee, sit byme awhile.
My soul is heavy, and Ifain would sleep.
I will, my lord.
God give your grace goodrest.
Sorrow breaks seasons andreposing hours,
makes the night morningand the noontide night.
Princes have but theirtitles for their glories,
an outward honor for aninward toil.
And for unfeltimaginations,
they often feel a world ofrestless cares,
so that between theirtitles and low name,
there's nothing differsbut the outward fame.
How?
Who's here?
What wouldst thou, fellow?
How cam'st thou hither?
I would speak withClarence,
and I came hither on melegs.
What?
So brief?
'Tis better, sir, than tobe tedious.
Let him see our commission,and talk no more.
I am in this commanded todeliver
the noble duke of Clarenceto your hands.
I will not reason what ismeant hereby
because I will be guiltlessfrom the meaning.
There lies the dukeasleep.
There are the keys.
I'll to the king andsignify to him
that thus I have resignedto you my charge.
You may, sir.
'Tis a point of wisdom.
Fare you well?
What? Shall I stab him ashe sleeps?
No.
For he'll say 'twas donecowardly when he wakes.
Why, he shall never wakeuntil the great judgment day.
Why, then he'll say westabbed him sleeping.
The urging of that word"judgment"
hath bred a kind ofremorse in me.
What? Art thou afraid?
Not to kill him, having awarrant,
but to be damned forkilling him,
from the which no warrantcan defend me.
I thought thou hadst beenresolute.
So I am, to let him live.
I'll back to the duke ofGloucester and tell him so.
Hey, I pray thee, stay alittle.
I hope this passionatehumor of mine will change.
It was wont to hold me butwhile one tells twenty.
One, two, three, four,five, six, seven, eight,nine, ten,
eleven, twelve, thirteen,fourteen, fifteen,
sixteen, seventeen,eighteen,
nineteen, twenty.
How dost thou feel thyselfnow?
Some certain dregs ofconscience are yet within me.
Remember our reward whenthe deed's done.
Zounds, he dies!
I had forgot the reward.
Where is thy consciencenow?
O, in the duke ofGloucester's purse.
When he opens his purse togive us our reward,
thy conscience flies out.
'Tis no matter. Let it go.
There's few or none willentertain it.
Or if it come to theeagain?
I'll not meddle with it.
It makes a man a coward.
A man cannot steal but itaccuseth him.
A man cannot swear but itchecks him.
A man cannot lie with hisneighbor's wife
but it detects him.
'Tis a blushing,shamefaced spirit
that mutinies in a man'sbosom.
It fills a man full ofobstacles.
It made me once restore apurse of gold
that by chance I found.
It beggars any man thatkeeps it.
It is turned out of townsand cities
for a dangerous thing,
and every man that meansto live well
endeavors to trust tohimself and live without it.
'Zounds.
'Tis is even now at myelbow,
persuading me not to killthe duke.
Take the devil in thymind, and believe him not.
He would insinuate withthee but to make thee sigh.
Tut, I am strong-framed.
He cannot prevail with me.
Spoke like a tall man thatrespects our reputation.
Come, shall we fall towork?
Take him on the costardwith the hilts of thy sword
and then throw him in themalmsey-butt in the next room.
O excellent devise!
And make a sop of him.
Hark.
He wakes.
Strike now?
We'll reason with him.
Where art thou, keeper?
Give me a cup of wine.
You shall have wineenough, my lord, anon.
In God's name, what artthou?
A man, as you are.
But not, as I am, royal.
Nor you, as we are, loyal.
Thy voice is thunder, butthy looks are humble.
My voice is now theking's, my looks mine own.
How darkly and how deadlydost thou speak.
Your eyes do menace me.
Why look you pale?
Who sent you hither?
Wherefore do you come?
To--
To murder me?
Aye. Aye.
You scarcely have thehearts to tell me so
and therefore cannot havethe hearts to do it.
Wherein, my friends, haveI offended you?
Offended us you have notbut the king.
I shall be reconciled tohim again.
Never, my lord. Therefore,prepare to die.
Are you drawn forth amonga world of men
to slay the innocent?
What is my offense?
Where is the evidence thatdoth accuse me?
What lawful quest havegiven their verdict up
unto the frowning judge?
Or who pronounced thebitter sentence
of poor Clarence death?
Before I be convict bycourse of law,
to threaten me with deathis most unlawful.
I charge you, as you hopeto have redemption
by Christ's dear blood shedfor our grievous sins,
that you depart and lay nohands on me.
The deed you undertake isdamnable.
What we will do, we doupon command.
And he that hath commandedis our king.
Erroneous vassals!
The great King of kings hathin the table of his law
commanded that thou shaltdo no murder.
Will you then spurn at hisedict and fulfill a man's?
Take heed, for he holdsvengeance in his hand
to hurl upon their headsthat break his law.
And that same vengeancedoth he hurl on thee
for false forswearing andfor murder too.
Thou didst receive thesacrament
to fight in quarrel of thehouse of Lancaster.
And like a traitor to thename of God
didst break that vow
and with thy treacherousblade
unrip'dst the bowels ofthy sovereign's son.
Whom thou was sworn tocherish and defend.
How can thou urge God'sdreadful law to us,
when thou hast broke it insuch dear degree?
Alas, for whose sake did Ithat ill deed?
For Edward, for mybrother, for his sake.
He sends you not to murderme for this,
for in that sin, he is asdeep as I.
If God will be avenged forthe deed,
O, know you yet, he doesit publicly.
Take not the quarrel fromhis powerful arm.
He needs no indirect orlawless course
to cut off those that haveoffended him.
Who made thee, then, abloody minister
when gallant-springingbrave Plantagenet,
that princely novice, wasstruck dead by thee?
My brother's love, thedevil, and my rage.
Thy brother's love, ourduty, and thy fault
provoke us hither now toslaughter thee.
Oh, if you love mybrother, hate not me.
I am his brother, and Ilove him well.
If you are hired for meed,go back again,
and I will send you to mybrother Gloucester,
who shall reward youbetter for my life
than Edward will fortidings of my death.
You are deceived.
Your brother Gloucesterhates you.
O, no, he loves me, and heholds me dear.
Go you to him from me.
Aye, so we will.
Tell him when that ourprincely father York
blessed his three sonswith his victorious arm
and charged us from hissoul to love each other,
he little thought of thisdivided friendship.
Bid Gloucester think ofthis, and he will weep.
Ah, millstones, as helessoned us to weep.
O, do not slander him, forhe is kind!
Right, as snow in harvest.
Come, you deceiveyourself.
'Tis he that sends us todestroy you here.
It cannot be,
for he bewept my fortune
and hugged me in his armsand swore with sobs
that he would labor mydelivery.
Why, so he doth,
when he delivers you fromthis earth's thralldom
to the joys of Heaven.
Make peace with God, foryou must die, my lord.
Have you that holy feelingin your souls
to counsel me to make mypeace with God,
and are you yet to yourown soul so blind
that you will war with Godby murdering me?
Oh, sirs, consider.
They that set you on to dothis deed
will hate you for thedeed.
What shall we do?
Relent, and save yoursouls.
Relent.
No, 'tis cowardly andwomanish.
Not to relent is beastly,savage, devilish.
Which of you, if you werea prince's son
being pent from liberty asI am now,
if two such murderers asyourselves came to you
would not entreat forlife?
Ah, you would beg, wereyou in my distress.
My friend, I spy some pityin thy looks.
O, if thine eye be not aflatterer,
come thou on my side andentreat for me.
A begging prince, whatbeggar pities not?
Look behind you, my lord!
Take that.
And that.
And if all this will notdo,
I'll drown you in themalmsey-butt within.
A bloody deed, anddesperately dispatched.
How fain, like Pilate,would I wash my hands
of this most grievousmurder.
How now.
What mean'st thou, thatthou helped me not?
The duke shall know howslack you have been.
I would he knew that I hadsaved his brother.
Take thou the fee, andtell him what I say,
for I repent me that theduke is slain!
Go, coward, as thou art!
Well.
I'll go hide the body insome hole
till that the duke giveorder for his burial.
And when I have my meed, Iwill away,
for this will out, andthen I must not stay.